Recipe: Caches (#241)
eclipse-langium/langium-website: hugo/content/docs/recipes/utilities/caches.md

---
title: "Caches"
weight: 0
---

## What is the problem?

You have parsed a document and you would like to execute some computation on the AST. But you don’t want to do this every time you see a certain node. You want to do it once for the lifetime of a document. Where to save it?

## How to solve it?

> For data that depends on the lifetime of a document or even the entire workspace, Langium has several kinds of caches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For data that depends on the lifetime of a document or even the entire workspace, Langium has several kinds of caches:
```

* the document cache saves key-value-pairs of given types `K` and `V` for each document. If the document gets changed or deleted the cache gets cleared automatically for the single files

> * the workspace cache also save key-value-pairs of given types `K` and `V` but gets cleared entirely when something in the workspace gets changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the workspace cache also saves key-value-pairs of given types `K` and `V`, but gets cleared entirely when something in the workspace gets changed
```
small typo, and would drop the `.` to be consistent with the first bullet point

> Besides those specific caches, Langium also provides

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides those specific caches, Langium also provides:
```

* a simple cache that can be used for any kind of key-value-data

> * a context cache that stores a simple cache for each context object. The document cache and workspace cache are implemented using the context cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* a context cache that stores a simple cache for each context object. The document cache and workspace cache are implemented using the context cache
```

## How to use it?

> Here we will use the `HelloWorld` example from the learning section. Let's keep it simple and just list persons in the document, that come from a comic book.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we will use the `HelloWorld` example from the learning section. Let's keep it simple and just list people in a document, which will come from a comic book.
```

```typescript
export type HelloWorldAddedServices = {
    utilities: {
        inferPublisherService: InferPublisherService
    },
    validation: {
        HelloWorldValidator: HelloWorldValidator
    }
}
//...
export const HelloWorldModule: Module<HelloWorldServices, PartialLangiumServices & HelloWorldAddedServices> = {
    utilities: {
        inferPublisherService: (services) => new CachedInferPublisherService(services)
    },
    validation: {
        //add `services` parameter here
        HelloWorldValidator: (services) => new HelloWorldValidator(services)
    }
};
```

### Test the result

Start the extension and create a `.hello` file with several persons, like this one:

```plaintext
person Wonderwoman
person Spiderman
person Homer //warning: unknown publisher!!
person Obelix
```

## Last words

Caching can improve the performance of your language server. It is especially useful for computations that are expensive to calculate. The `DocumentCache` and `WorkspaceCache` are the most common caches to use. The `ContextCache` is useful if you need to store data for a specific context object. If you only need a key-value store, you can use the `SimpleCache`.

> All of them are disposable compared to a simple `Map<K, V>`. If you dispose them by calling `dispose()` the entries will be removed and the memory will be freed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of these caches are disposable compared to a simple `Map<K, V>`. If you dispose them by calling `dispose()` the entries will be removed and the memory will be freed.
```

    inferPublisher(person: Person): KnownPublisher|undefined {
        for (const [publisher, persons] of Object.entries(KnownPersonNames)) {
            if(persons.includes(person.name)) {
                return publisher as KnownPublisher;
            }
        }
        return undefined;
    }
}
```

### Add a cache

Now we want to cache the results of the `inferPublisher` method. We can use the `DocumentCache` for this. We will reuse the uncached service as base class and override the `inferPublisher` method:

```typescript
export class CachedInferPublisherService extends UncachedInferPublisherService {
    private readonly cache: DocumentCache<Person, KnownPublisher|undefined>;
    constructor(services: HelloWorldServices) {
        super();
        this.cache = new DocumentCache(services.shared);
    }
    override inferPublisher(person: Person): KnownPublisher|undefined {
        const documentUri = AstUtils.getDocument(person).uri;
        if(this.cache.has(documentUri, person)) {
           return this.cache.get(documentUri, person)!;
        }
        const publisher = super.inferPublisher(person);
        this.cache.set(documentUri, person, publisher);

>         return publisher;

Reviewer 2: Demonstrating the use of `ContextCache.get(contextKey: Context, key: Key, provider: () => Value): Value` might also be useful:

```ts
const documentUri = AstUtils.getDocument(person).uri;
return this.cache.get(documentUri, person, () => super.inferPublisher(person));
```

Author: Uh! Very nice! I was not aware of, thank you!
